The calciner is one of the major parts of a cement plant where the calcination of calcium carbonate form calcium oxide and carbon dioxide takes place. Several physical and chemical factors govern the process like thermodynamics and chemical kinetics of the reaction, mass transfer of carbon dioxide and heat transfer between the various phases (Zhang, 2011). The combination of these factors makes the modelling of calciner difficult. Machine learning algorithms learns by training on data generally on historical data to predict or make a decision without explicitly being programed to do so. Machine learning as shown itself to be a tool capable of forming complex relations between input parameters and desired output. This relationship can't be numerically established or are difficult to establish like that of a calciner. The model discussed in this paper is based on machine learning. Machine learning regression algorithms are powerful tools which are able to perform better on numerical data with one or more dependent variable and a series of independent variable. Feature were extracted and selected accordingly and exploratory data analysis was conducted. The parameter to be predicted/label was the output temperature of a calciner (P.C. O/T temp). Various machine learning regression algorithms were trained on the prepared dataset. Comparative analysis of the root mean squared error and R2 score of the algorithms on test dataset was conducted and the best among them was selected for the model namely artificial neural network.
